my name is porvi srivastav
i am the general manager in vp of
products at hubspot the number one crm
platform for growing businesses
my job in short is bringing the right
products home by the right people
and systems to market and then help grow
our customers and business
prior to hubspot i have run product
engineering and operations at salesforce
microsoft and my own startup
my first real job interestingly in the
aftermath of financial crisis
was in
customer service so i became a manager
pretty early on in my career and found
the path to leadership by failing at
different junctures
today i'm sharing those failure stories
and learnings with you all in this
amazing sastra platform
i was also um
i also run a product leadership course
specifically on this topic so i'm deeply
passionate about
um investing in people before products
and processes
so let's get started and move to the
next slide
so just to give you a preview of what
i'm going to talk about today we are
going deep into the fabric of building a
team all the way to an organization and
how it involves a continuous
reassessment of the zero state whether
whether it be people on the team uh
whether it be organizational hierarchy
or the systems that are in place to
scale
these five learnings reflect what i
learned in the last 15 years leading
cross functional and cross geographical
themes in different companies at
different levels
so lesson number one
giving feedback but giving it at the
right time for it to drive the desired
behavioral changes
lesson number two
hiring specifically relevant in the
crazy market we are in right now but
hiring for culture and values over
smartness and raw intellect
lesson number three setting up an
equitable and transparent performance
system as you grow your team and as you
grow your company
lesson number four
the marriage of accountability and
empathy and how you can drive great
people and business performance while
still caring for your team
and finally uh lesson number five
mentors and peers and how critical they
are to building your team
but building it in the right way
when i was thinking about structuring
this talk i wanted two things
now number one i wanted to make it fun
while providing some value from my
leadership experience and number two
i did want to be vulnerable and
transparent to admit the mistakes and
failures on such a broad forum because
then i could acknowledge the learnings
and how it has helped me grow as an
individual and a leader and hopefully it
can help
you guys who are on the call today
so with that let's get into uh the next
slide with the framework of how i see
scaling and organization what it takes
the fundamental framework of what and
how to scale an organization is really
three parts starting with
building a team
now typically the way i build a team is
hiring externally or through internal
movement i have aqua hired in the past
um i've acquired a team and merged with
an existing team i've also inherited a
team
um of peers who were peers at a point
and then managed them
and all three ways of building a team
come with their own unique set of
challenges for example a big challenge
with hiring is firstly finding a fit for
your company culture and then finding
the right leveling
of that individual in an insanely
competitive market a typical challenge
with aqua hiring is the culture fit
whether it be distinct geographies
language time zones
and you could be a first time manager or
you could be a very experienced manager
but the nuances of managing someone
who's early on in their careers versus
someone who's very experienced
is just really different
um
and i have had to struggle in the past
uh with getting that nuance right
so billing is the first part from
building we go to uh the second step
which is scaling a team through
structuring or setting it up with an
operating model where everyone is clear
not in agreement but have clarity
if decision making and their roles in
that process
are aligned the other part is aligning
to a set of team values or shared values
as i call it so that
globally diverse teams can understand
each other's perspective and value
drivers which ultimately leads to better
uh planning better execution and really
better business outcomes
and while one sets up these value
systems and operating model it is also
critical to set up success post for
individuals on the team and constantly
reassess them
and then finally um
evaluating performance and growing the
team
growth is two-dimensional one needs to
constantly evaluate promoting but also
letting go of people and in the middle
is coaching to have a successor
i've been in situations where i've gone
from one meeting where
i was promoting someone to a senior role
right to another meeting that i had to
put someone on a performance improvement
plan in the same day
and ultimately the way in which leaders
demonstrate respect integrity while
driving the right business outcomes and
accountability is what makes an
organization skill
so these three stages of scaling and
organization are all interconnected if
you're growing a team you'll need to
hire and backfill and with new
individuals you need to establish a new
operating model and a value system and
in that process some individuals um will
grow and they have expanded roles so
with that framework in mind i want to go
over top five mistakes i made throughout
these years
and the lessons i learned while scaling
global product teams but i'll take a
pause here and ask if you have any
questions
um
before
i go into my stories
uh i see there are not any questions
coming out but i throat this i would
love to know that um
if you experience certain issues in the
past with respect to managing and you've
made mistakes um keep them dropping in
the chat
so
let's start with the first lesson
the importance of timely feedback
so early in my management years and this
was more than a decade ago now i was
promoted and inherited a small team of
tenured employees and this was support
operations role i also hired couple of
more junior employees we had a mix of
experienced
teammates as well as more
more college grads
one of my team members let's call him
sam
um
who had been in the time for a while had
been experiencing some performance
issues
and my manager had briefed me on them
before they transferred sam and derby
the issues were related to some
condescending comments against
relatively junior members around lack of
collaboration on cross-functional
projects
and the need to be the sole decision
maker and
and driver in multi-disciplinary
projects
as a new manager and and someone who
worked with sam as a peer before
i acknowledged the feedback but did not
address it immediately
for lack of a better word i was very
scared given i was still early in my
career and resorted to ignoring the
feedback till i saw the issues in action
myself
slowly i started seeing the same issues
in the daily team meeting so group
presentations in one of these instances
which i can clearly recall sam made a
remark around how we need to raise the
hiring bar technically uh because the
people that we've been hiring we just
keep on dropping the ball on um on the
right technical aptitude every year
uh it was one of the first meetings that
a couple of other these junior folks
that we'd hired were attending
given sam was on the tv loop for all of
these individuals
i felt it was pretty inappropriate for
him to bring this concern broadly in
that meeting before discussing it with
the recruiting team or even discussing
it with me
so this was a concerning situation um
and in my next one-on-one i gave that
feedback to sam
however what i did is i wrapped that
feedback around how great he was
technically and how he contributed to
complex problem solving
and if he felt that his teammates were
not technically competent he should help
them grow and i will help them grow
the effect was that sam took the
feedback very lightly and did not make
any changes um
the long-term effect of the giving this
kind of feedback you know uh compliments
um
around constructive criticism aka the
feedback sandwich was that 50
percent of the team attributed in less
than nine months and ultimately i got
critical feedback of not having managed
sam properly
which is which was very right
in that moment
um sam ultimately left the team
but not before disrupting the fabric uh
of our culture and the speed to deliver
business value
my main learnings were number one
addressing the feedback in the moment
with contacts
and number two not really letting the
lack of experience or management years
in any role deter me from having those
hard conversations
today as a leader
who has led multiple disciplines and
larger teams i share that right
leadership maturity expectations when
someone joins my team
i also believe in providing timely
feedback with examples to support our
team to grow better
so that was the first lesson
moving on lesson number two
hiring for culture and team fit over raw
intellect
now this one can be a little
controversial but as you scale the right
you need the right kind of ambition on
the team
which is company
over business over team over yourself
and that's an indicator of people who
will write the way with you as you skill
so whenever that sales force and even at
microsoft
i interviewed a lot of candidates from
undergrad and mbas coming into
structured programs which were designed
for high potential high performing hires
that were created to fill the next level
of leadership slate for the companies
over the years i've hired these
individuals on my own team either as
part of a rotation or a full-time role
one of the nuances of hiring high
potential employees is assessing if
their ambition
for self-growth can be counter
productive to the team and the company
growth
in
this specific case i hired a super smart
individual from an elite mba program
let's
let's call her sheila
sheila was intelligent she worked hard
and she had this unique capability to be
able to connect the data and insight
across businesses or business lines
which was very valuable because we were
developing a platform product at the
time
over the next few months she delivered
few product features and i was pretty
impressed with her dedication that far
in her nine uh six months check-in uh
360 degree review she mentioned that she
was ready for the next level and to get
promoted
and although she'd been performing
really well with tactical deliveries um
she hadn't
she had yet to prove uh other aspects of
her role like creating a go to market
plan spearheading a full feature launch
we discussed career orders and
competencies required for next level
and the fact that she was trending in
the right direction but i needed her to
master those skills as well
and some of it comes from spending time
in the level
to gain maturity across these skills
that is generally a guideline for
promoting someone to the next level
now
it got to a point that she started
optimizing for spending time on external
visibility
rather than getting the work done which
led to dropping the ball on some
critical design and product decisions
she would come to one-on-ones for at
least a six to eight one-on-ones and she
would bring in a specific
skills
of that checklist that we had discussed
and how she was mastering it and now
that she was ready to get promoted
um
she also discussed her desire to lead
multiple side projects but her core
products suffer from a lot of lack of
strategic direction
slowly her performance started to
degrade and we had to put her on a
performance improvement plan
she ultimately left the company to go to
a startup
in retrospect sheila was not a great
cultural fit for the scale of the
company and the value system
her expectations of rapid growth hustle
uh were probably more suitable for
startup
my biggest failure as a leader
was not being able to identify these
signals during the hiring process and
delving deep into examples of how she
portrayed our company values in her past
experience
i also realized how critical 90 days
success plan is when someone new on
boards your team
um today whether it be a senior director
or a senior pm
i encourage my teams to always have a
90-day success plan
um
i want to take a pause here and i i want
to go through the questions um
and just read them out if there are any
experiences that you guys have left in
the chat
um
so uh in usa teams firing the term that
many managers try to avoid how are you
using this very important action in your
operations that's a really interesting
question i'm going to park that one
because i do want to discuss it in in
the q a um but keep your questions and
your comments around the the
the issues you have faced or the
challenges you have faced as the manager
all right so going into the next lesson
which is closely connected to what we
are discussing
establishing a performance and
progression framework early on
i started my career with my own small
venture and over the years have hired
and grown teams across roles
one simple practice that is always
underestimated is having a well-defined
performance management framework
especially in the early stages of
running a company
i run into this issue at my own startup
when we started hiring engineers and did
not have a framework for growth or
leveling
so we'd anchor on basic interview
questions and years of experience to
designate someone as an engineer or
senior engineer
and there was a situation when we had
someone who had been at the company for
six months and was threatening to leave
and um you know it was a crucial he was
crucial to be there for the uh mvp that
we're going to release so
we
promoted him not the right thing to do
but we did promote him and he was doing
well
and then we hired someone else from our
side
at the principal levels because we had
to match their titles so we had someone
who'd been in the system at senior and
someone who's coming from outside of
principal kind of the same experience
level and ultimately that caused a lot
of like chaos within within that uh team
um
my learning was
number one having a clear performance
leveling competency and growth path and
that can never come too early
you know you can never be too early for
establishing those guidelines
number two is really avoiding out of
cycle promotions and raises because they
signal deficiency in the performance
system as opposed to growth so spend the
time building those systems to scale
you know of course there'll be
exceptions but they shouldn't be the
norm
with that let's move to our next lesson
you know one of the most rewarding but
also the most challenging avenues of
growth is acquisition and integration
a big part of that product um and growth
opportunity comes from people and their
ability to work together
productively for long enough to produce
a desired impact
back in 2019 we integrated teams from
israel and us to form a product team for
an emerging business line
this was right before the pandemic so
we'd actually only met both the teams
together once before travel restrictions
came into existence
over the next few months as
as a leadership and i personally ran
into so many different issues
right from miscommunication to alignment
to scoping decisions
structuring processes that were
inclusive
driving the business forward by
establishing clear accountability
and i distinctly remember um
what my svp of engineering at that time
advised me
and other leaders
he said when you're leading remote or
distributed teams
always assume best intentions on either
side
i'll never forget that advice because it
changed the way i structured meetings it
changed the way i communicated and made
decisions
so we did three things
number one
we established a shared value system
where each of the doc each of us
documented the values that we couldn't
compromise on
and through that we developed an
understanding of each other's strengths
each other's skills and how we can
establish operating principles on the
team so
if a change was made we knew where to go
back to what is a driving
memo
the other change was around
communication and documentation we not
only documented the decisions but also
the context and the rationale behind it
i distinctly remember deliberating
building horizontally versus building
vertically and we discussed three
options and we literally followed a
comps plan to roll out the decision
across geographies
and lastly running meetings
given the time between both locations we
structured dedicated daytime for
one-on-one and group meetings which we
alternated every quarter so no one team
had to work too early or too late
throughout the year
today those learnings are valuable in
the way i structure a team which is
understanding individual values and
setting up people for success first and
then setting up processes and product to
follow second
with that
we are reaching our last lesson
when you are in a hyper scale mode and
especially in this market internal
transfers are a good medium especially
if you know someone is still looking for
a new role
on the screen on the left side you see a
screenshot of one of my conversations
with another leader
and this might be me being my most
vulnerable but i wanted to put it out
there that different companies have
different culture around internal
movement and learning and respecting
that context is very very important
in this particular case
i had a critical senior role open in my
org
and so i reached out to the candidate
first to gauge interest before reaching
out to their manager
my rationale was if the candidate wasn't
interested there is no point in reaching
out to the manager and create a doubt in
their mind
and this particular candidate just told
us no
so
i did not follow further and that was in
my mind at that point the right thing to
do
however
the manager somehow got to know and
this is actually a conversation between
this leader and me
um and he explained to me the usual
process followed at this specific
company
you know one of the bigger learnings was
understanding
the internal reshuffle playbook as
opposed to following a playbook from my
last companies when it comes to internal
hiring
another big learning was valuing and
investing in these partner relationships
so when i do end up making mistakes
which i will in the future also
i can get valuable
feedback to learn and grow
so now when i'm doing such a change i
always first understand the recruiting
playbook and then accordingly align and
communicate with different stakeholders
so with that those were the top five
mistakes we'll just move on to wrap a
little bit around
the structure that we first discussed
i learned
you know by by failing by building the
teams by setting them up and by growing
them but failing at each of these
junctures in
um you know i can't really share the
stories so going back to that framework
that we put in the in the starting of
the session
the mistakes i made at each one of these
sages had a impact on the other stages
as well
and hence having gone through these
experiences now
i think across the whole ecosystem when
making an organizational change or
bringing in a new leader on the team
so just recapping in the last slide
those lessons
importance of timely feedback can never
be
underestimated hire for culture fit
over raw intellect
establish performance framework early on
in your journey
lead with accountability and empathy
and finally valuing and learning from
your peers
i'm super grateful to sastra for this
platform and hoping that sharing my
experiences helps all of you leaders in
some way in taking your own decisions
tomorrow
thank you and now we are open for q a
so i'm going to look at the q a tab um
recruiting and building the right team
is part of your framework can you share
one of the questions you ask candidates
who to screen for better fit
and what's your general approach to
recruiting in this market
that's a great question so
my
primary area
around um culture fit is getting
examples uh from
candidates where they've
displayed these value systems and they
failed and learned something about these
values for example at hubspot our value
system is around heart and one of my
favorite values in that heart is being
humble
so
i would ask about
about someone's experience of a conflict
and how they resolved it and how they
resolved it is the part when you can get
to know if you are humble about your
accomplishments and are you open to
learning from others so that's how i
usually uh engage candidates the general
approach to recruiting um is
there are three factors someone wants to
work for your company the people
the products or the business and what
you're making
and um
and just financially it's lucrative to
be there your financial obligations are
being met so these are the three factors
very transparently
and i uh i i think i try to bank on the
fact if you're paying fair value if
you're paying market value we have the
best people so is it a fit for what they
want to learn and where they want to
grow
versus where we are and if that that's a
good fit
that's how i make a pitch for recruiting
um
so going to the next question in lesson
number one of giving feedback
lost that good in lesson number one of
giving feedback you shared an example of
a toxic teammate who eventually caused
others to leave
and not being able to give them feedback
or action on it earlier
what you do now in that situation so
just to correct i don't think this
person was like toxic what i would say
is they were there was a big lack of
awareness and on my part i failed to
give them that perspective clearly with
examples in a timely fashion what i do
now is um let's say i'm in a meeting and
i would see someone
if someone is presenting and they did
not
give a good customer example or they did
not do a good job at presenting for
whatever reason i would just come back
and given we are still remote uh i i
generally like
ping on slack and discuss like what they
did was okay but that's some this is
something else that they could do and
that and the reason it would be a better
thing to do as opposed to what they were
doing i give it in the moment and then i
kind of follow up in my one-on-one on
why i gave that feedback and how it's
important so i've
tried to lessen protecting feedback with
compliments and giving it in the moment
but giving it respectfully and the fact
that i i am going to work on this uh
i am going to work with this individual
on the feedback now we have one minute
left um
curious uh okay i'm gonna go back to
sergey's question
um
because i did read it in usa teams
firing is a term that many managers try
to avoid how are you using this very
important action in your operations
so i know like a lot of places you would
say the role has been impacted or the
role has been eliminated i went i went
through some similar challenges in the
aftermath of the 08 crisis
um
i
again i
work with our recruiting teams and in
the moment when you're doing we have to
take such hard decisions in a company
the thing to remember is let let
if someone is leaving the company let
them leave with pride and respect and
don't take that away from
from them so i always have that in the
back of my mind that this person
provided huge value when they were there
in the company and because of whatever
reasons this role has been impacted i
have to let go of the individual with
pride and respect and remember all that
good work so that's something i i always
calculate or i always have in the back
of my mind i actually even write
stickings
before going into some of those hard
conversations
[Music]
you